# University of Edinburgh - Final Year Dissertation

This is my 2022 undergraduate dissertation for the University of Edinburgh course, Global Agriculture and Food Security. The dissertation is written in RMarkdown and, in theory, all supporting documentation is provided along with the final output so that the full dissertation, including data analysis, can be fully reporduced. In practice, I haven't yet tried to reproduce it with what is provided here...

## Abstract

In response to recent agricultural land purchases by corporations and investment ﬁrms expressly for purposes of aﬀorestation, this dissertation sets out to explore the motive behind such purchases by assessing the current state of UK carbon markets and attempting to determine the price at which it becomes more proﬁtable to sell carbon oﬀsets through aﬀorestation than to produce food on UK agricultural land.

One of the key drivers of recent land purchases is found to stem from an increase in the government targeted rates of aﬀorestation in the UK, the justiﬁcation for which is partially attributed to carbon sequestration for use as emissions oﬀsets in achieving “Net Zero” ambitions. Though regulation of the creation of carbon oﬀset units in the UK seems robust, regulation governing the transparency of the nascent market for trading those units seems less comprehensive. This lack of transparency has created a highly speculative market, with publicly reported sale prices for ex-ante units ranging from £10 to £40. This variation seems to be largely driven by limits on market knowledge, and has a considerable impact on the proﬁtability of, and incentivisation for, aﬀorestation projects, with those few in possession of greater market knowledge able to make bolder investment decisions such as land purchases. Currently, only a small portion of total emissions are capable of being oﬀset through carbon units in the UK, however, the IPCC has recently stated that limiting global warming to 1.5 °C cannot be achieved without carbon removals, and the framework governing international trade of carbon oﬀsets, Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, was ﬁnally agreed at COP26 in 2021. Both events suggest a near-term proliferation in both domestic and global carbon markets, with implications on farm proﬁtability, land use change, tenant farming, and food security. Since the objective of carbon markets is to maximise carbon removals, not proﬁt, there is a need for greater transparency in the operation of these markets to encourage competition and to ensure that opportunities can be equally realised by all.

This work ﬁnds that, although an estimate of the price at which it becomes more proﬁtable to grow trees than food can be made using publicly available secondary data - around £50/unit in the Scottish Highlands and £100/unit in the South of England at current farm income levels - the considerable uncertainty surrounding input variables limits conﬁdence in these results, and it is expected that primary data would vastly improve the accuracy of the calculations.
